Quickly wanna mention build, I don't wanna
get into it in a huge amount of detail,
because it's a little bit beyond
the scope of what we're covering.
But the build stage is where
the website is turned into a functional
website, right?
It's where the design is finalized,
you make it fully responsive,
everything works, it operate at scale.
It's better to completely finalize
the design in the browser.
So there is a design elements still
going on here, I would argue, right?
I see people spend hours mocking
up every form of button,
every form error message,
and everything else.
When really, that's a lot easier
to just do in the browser
sitting alongside the developer
than it is to do it all in Figma.
So I think involving the designer at
this stage is still essential and
still something you should do.
How do you do that?
Well, obviously,
you're working on the fully
responsive design at that stage.
You're looking at all the buttons and
form states, all that kind of stuff.
You're looking at your error messages.
This is where you get into
things like design systems,
animation to enhance the design.
And again, you can do some last minute
usability testing at this stage.
But again, that's all a lot of stuff.
You might not have the time or
capability to do that.
So the minimum here is, look,
you've gotta work with the developer
to work out button states and
how forms work and error messages.
And I'm sorry that I know that
there are some pure developers
listening to this that don't do design,
but
we can't be allowing developers to
make these kinds of design decisions.
It's a train wreck, right?
When your error messages read some
code that nobody understands,
you know that developer has been involved.
Just saying, sorry to offend.
Okay, so that's the minimum.
And then finally, live, well,
that's one we're talking about this
perception that a project ends, right?
We've redesigned the website, we're done.
And then in five years, the website
is piling, steaming massive BS,
because it hasn't been maintained,
it hasn't been looked after.
So that's why from the very beginning,
I talk about the life stage.
Once the website is launched, how are we
gonna maintain it, how are we gonna
improve it, how are we gonna optimize it,
how are we gonna maximize conversion, etc?
And really, until a website goes live,
even if you've done usability testing,
user research, you've really only
got a theoretical knowledge of how
users are gonna respond to it.
So the live phase allows you a chance
to observe user behavior and
that kind of stuff.
And that's where you're
looking at analytics,
you're looking at session recordings,
heat maps, AB testing, usability testing.
As an absolute minimum, I would recommend
you have up and running on a website,
a tool called Microsoft Clarity.
Microsoft Clarity is a great free
tool that it's a bit like Hotjar.
It lets you watch sessions back.
It lets you see where people
are getting frustrated on a website,
where they're making mistakes.
It gives you loads of really great
insights, and you just check that,
see where people are going wrong and
fix it.
But we'll come on to more of
that kind of stuff later.